Diverse Types of Plants And Their Uses
Human beings get their food & many resources from plants. The green expanse of the forests, filled with various types of plants, is where we primarily source our raw materials. Plants not only ensure the survival of the human race but also their prosperity, providing us with an abundance of resources that we utilize intelligently to make our lives easy & hassle-free.

Every time we step out, we witness the beautiful greens and a distinct variety of plants with different appearances and functions. That is why we, at JBM Global School recognized as one of the top schools in Noida, encourage our students to visit their nearby garden and see the many different types of plants found in nature.

Plants vary so much from each other due to their differing growth habits and characteristics. Let us learn more about the various categories that plants have been divided into.

What Are The Different Types Of Plants?
Following are some of the main types of plants:
1. Herbs
These are small plants that have soft, green & delicate stems with not many branches or any wood tissue. These are easier to uproot from the soil, making them easier to plant in a pot.
It takes just one or two seasons for these to have a complete life cycle. Herbs contain a lot of nutritional benefits. They are often used for medicinal purposes. Mint, rosemary, tomato, paddy, and bananas are some examples of herbs.


2. Shrubs
rose plant - shrubs
These are mid-size woody plants that have hard, woody & flexible stems and many branches. Generally, their height ranges from 6m to 10m tall, making them taller than herbs yet shorter than trees.

Shrubs have varying lifespans as per different species. Some common examples of shrubs are rose, jasmine, lemon, tulsi, and henna.

3. Trees
trees
Big & tall plants with very thick, hard & woody stems (trunk) are called trees. Their trunk (main stem) has many branches attached that bear leaves, flowers, and fruits. However, you will find that not all trees have branches, some are branchless such as coconut trees.

The general lifespan of a tree is very long. They live for several years, some live for decades and few live through centuries as well. You can find trees such as Banyan, mango, neem, cashew, teak, and oak around you.

4. Creepers
These are plants with fragile, long & thin stems, which makes them unable to stand upright without support. So, they creep and spread readily on the ground all around. Watermelon, strawberry, pumpkin, and sweet potatoes are common examples of creepers.

Also Read:  7 Types Of Soil On Earth’s Surface

5. Climbers
climber
These are more complex than creepers. Similar to creepers, climbers also have long, thin, and weak stems that are unable to stand upright, but when given external support, these grow vertically and are capable of carrying their own weight.

Climbers have special structures known as tendrils that help them climb. Some of the common climbers are pea plants, grapevine, sweet gourd, money plants, and more.

6. Flowering Plants
Flowering Plants
These are the diverse groups of plants that produce flowers for reproduction. They are also known as angiosperms and are crucial in ecosystems for providing food, shelter, and oxygen to animals. Some common examples of flowering plants are roses, lily, hibiscus, and more.

7. Ferns
Ferns
These are the spore-bearing plants that, unlike flowering plants, do not bear flowers or seeds but consist of roots, stems & leaves and usually reproduce sexually through tiny spores and sometimes asexually through vegetative propagation. Some common ferns are Boston fern, Staghorn fern, Holly fern, and more.

8. Mosses
moss
Mosses are small, flowerless plants that typically form dense green clumps, often in damp or shady locations. They usually carpet woodland and forest floors. Some of the common examples of mosses are Riccia, Sphagnum, Funaria, Polytrichum, etc.

9. Succulents
These are the plants that have their parts thickened and fleshy, usually to retain water in arid climates or soil conditions and to cope with the climate they have been presented with. Some common examples of succulents are Cacti, Aloe, Snake plants, ZZ Plants, Jade plants, and more.

10. Aquatic Plants
Aquatic Plants
These are the plants that have adapted to living in aquatic environments – saltwater or freshwater. Aquatic plants, also known as hydrophytes, grow in or near water. They can be emergent, submergent, or floating on water. Some common examples of aquatic plants are water lily, lotus, and water hyacinth.
11. Palms
palms
These are the plants that can grow as climbers, shrubs, tree-like, and stemless plants and are distinguished by their large, compound, evergreen leaves known as fronds. When palms grow as trees, they are called palm trees. Some common types of palms are coconut trees, date palms, and foxtail palms.

12. Carnivorous Plants
Carnivorous Plants
These are the plants that derive some or most of their nutrients from trapping and consuming insects and sometimes animals such as small mammals & birds. Some common examples of carnivorous plants are pitcher plants, Venus flytraps, and cobra lilies.

What Are The Different Parts Of Plants?
Parts of plant
Plants typically have the following parts:

1. Roots – These are the underground part of a plant that absorbs water and minerals and anchors the plant firmly in the soil.

2. Stems – It is the part of the plant above the ground that supports the plant and transports water and minerals from roots to its other parts. 

3. Leaves – These are flattened green outgrowth They contain chlorophyll that helps the plants to prepare their food using sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water.

4. Flowers – The most beautiful and colorful part of a plant, flowers are the reproductive part of a plant, consisting of petals, sepals, stamens, and pistils. 

Also Read:  10 Benefits of Reading Newspaper For Students